# Study Session: Variational Fast Forwarding

:::Intro (What's in this post)
This post is a technical review of a quantum simulation method called [Variational Fast Forwarding](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.04292), pioneered by researchers at Los Alamos National Lab. 


The discussion is at the graduate level.
:::



As you may have learned in my post about [quantum simulation](?linkfile=Oct22/09.md), one of the first genres of problem quantum computers will be useful for is simulating the **time evolution** of quantum systems. Time evolution, unlike state preparation, has a resource cost such that depth scales linearly with trotter steps, and trotter steps scale with your appetite for error &mdash; which can be quite large for many researchers interested in understanding phase diagrams rather than details. Time evolution of dynamical quantum systems is an active area of research in quantum computing, with new and clever algorithms coming out regularly.

This blog post is going to focus on one such method, [Variational Fast Forwarding](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1910.04292). This method borrows from the NISQ successes of VQE to enable the time evolution of certain systems in a 'sped-up' way, e.g. a using a number of operations that scales *sub-linearly* with total simulation time. This allows one to, in principle, evolve a quantum system beyond the coherence time, which would otherwise represent a hard complexity limit in time evolving a quantum simulation NISQ devices. 

# Breaking Down the Name

As a well-named technique, we can get the gist of what the method entails at first glance. 

## Fast-forwarding

No fast-forwarding Theorem states that 

FFWable hams:
 - Commuting Local Hamailtonians
 - quadratic fermions
 - continous time QW on certain graphs
 - exactly solvable/diagonalizable 

## Variational





Diagonalization
:::Equation
$$
U(\Delta t) \approx V(\vec \alpha, \delta t) = W D W^\dag
$$
:::

# Implementation

Let's walk through an implementation of this algorithm.





## Cost Function

1. It is faithful
2. It is efficient to compute
3. It has an operational meaning
4. It scales will with problem size

Hilbert-Schmidt inner product does not satisfy criterion 4
$$
\langle V,U\rangle = \text{Tr} (V^\dag U)
$$

Propose, instead, a weighted average of global overlaps.

### QAQC (quack)
[QAQC](https://quantum-journal.org/papers/q-2019-05-13-140/)
$$
C_{LHST}(U, V) = 1 - \frac{1}{n}\sum_{j=1}^n F_e^{(j)}
$$


# Notes for me

