# Bushwhacking a Path to Useful Quantum Simulation | Part 1

:::Intro (What you'll find in this post)
This blog post is Part 1 of an overview series on Digital Quantum Simulation. It is intended for technical non-experts. The technical parts will be at the early graduate level.   

In this part, we will first focus on the kind of problems that quantum simulation is good for, and some explanation as to why. In later posts, we will explore methods as well as timescales that useful quantum advantages could occur. 
___
I am continually learning and don't claim to be the perfect domain expert in the rapidly evolving set QC topics & hardware -- so if you spot a factual inaccuracy, feel free to let me know :)!
:::






Quantum simulation is one of the priority topics in Quantum Computing that we *know* will result in very useful computational acceleration. It is less like searching for the fountain of youth, and more akin to mountaineering &mdash; we can see the mountain, the problem is charting a path to scale the cliff. 

Unlike many algorithms that have been devised to provide *speed-ups* of computational tasks by abusing quantum parralellism, quantum simulation's main boon is the *size of the Hilbert space*. Indeed, the main limiting factor to quantum simulation in many classical algorithms is literrally the storage capacity needed to represent some corner of the Hilbert space that the system lives in. While adding a single spin degree of freedom in a general quantum simulation means *doubling* the required memory, for a quantum computer, qubit requirements scale linearly.


There is a lot going on in the realm of quantum simulation 


Highly recommend the following lit

- Quantum emulators: [Practical quantum advantage in quantum simulation](https://www-nature-com-s.caas.cn/articles/s41586-022-04940-6)
- Tutorial using SDK: [Quantum Simulation on Noisy Superconducting Quantum Computers](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2209.02795.pdf)
- Classic Reference: [Quantum Simulation](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1308.6253.pdf)


This blog post is intended to be a partially technical review of ideas, progress and resources related to digital quantum simulation, though we will mention

# What is quantum simulation?

An important question to answer is what, actually is Quantum Simulation? 

- Quantum simulation is the computational modeliing of physical systems that require quantum mechanics to describe on a universal gate based quantum computer


We will conversely define Quantum Emulation to be on simulators 

- Quantum emulation is the engineering of physical quantum systems to reproduce the behavior of a target quantum system

A good way to think about the difference is by analogy with areospace engineering. Contrast the usefulnes of (classical) computer simulations with studying the effects of scale models of aircraft in [Wind Tunnels](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wind_tunnel)



# Problem Classes

There are two generic problem classes in the field of Quantum Simulation, namely "Ground State Preparation" and "Time Evolution". 

**Ground State Preparation** involves the process of finding the minimum energies and their related states of a quantum mechanical system. The usual strategy for ground state preparation involves some form of adiabatic transformation, which can be costly in gate-depth. If you're looking for some technical information about this for a universal digital quantum computer, a decent starting point would be this [2015 paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1506.05135.pdf) from Microsoft StationQ.



**Time Evolution** involves preparing some quantum state in your qubit register and then applying the time evolution operator, typically $U(t) = e^{- i H t}$, compiled down to the appropriate gates and operations to these qubits. For analog and some programmable emulators, the engineers and experimental can typically apply continuously apply a gate to emulate the desired time evolution operator. In a digital circuit, one has to *Trotterize* the time evolution operator into a series of discrete gates. Unfamiliar readers can find information about this process on page 207 of [Nielsen and Chuang](https://www.amazon.com/Quantum-Computation-Information-10th-Anniversary/dp/1107002176).



As an aside, one could likely contrive more sorts of problems in quantum simulation, for instance for exploring quantum thermodyanmics e.g. systematically exploring distributions of states that are *not* ground states, such as in a [Boltzman Machines](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boltzmann_machine). For the most part, however, the above listed are the two big categories of problems that relate to computationally difficult quantum problems of widespread physical interest.


## Ground State Preparation
As noted above, adiabatic Ground State Preparation is very costly, riddled with pitfalls [in the presence of level crossings](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2208.02199.pdf), and sensitive to noise, meaning that it is not a fantastic target for NISQ. And usually, when your algorithm fails due to noise, level crossings, or just simply failing to reach appropriate gate depth, it fails badly enough to leave you totally lost in Hilbertspace rather in the small manifold of low energy states you were targeting. 


### Condensed Matter \& Solid State

Condensed Matter and Solid Sate physics, by extension, are two areas that are likely to see the soonest advantages from DQS. 

### Chemistry


## Time Evolution
Time evolution, unlike ground state preparation, has a resource cost such that depth scales linearly with trotter steps, and trotter steps scale with your appetite for error &mdash; which can be quite large for many researchers interested in understanding phase diagrams rather than details. Time evolution of dynamical quantum systems is an active area of research in quantum computing, with new and clever algorithms coming out regularly.

On the other hand, Time Evolution is relatively straightforward


### Quantum Dynamics

### High Energy Physics




## Qualitative Insights are Powerful
There is a great point made by the authors of  [Practical quantum advantage in quantum simulation](https://www-nature-com-s.caas.cn/articles/s41586-022-04940-6) that I haven't seen frequently discussed in other reviews, white papers, or opinion pieces: 

:::Quote
However, there are many puzzles in describing solid-state materials where even the qualitative behavior is not decided by classical computation, and accurately solving simplified models can provide substantial insight — both directly for the materials, and for validating and calibrating approximate classical calculation methods.
:::

Coming from a background in theoretical condensed matter physics, it's a sentiment I wish was more widely understood within the QC community: the target of many quantum simulations need not be highly precise data about energy levels of chemicals or complicated crystal lattices. In *many* important models, just being able to extract *qualitative* insights is enough to prgroess a scientific field quite rapidly


If you think about the history of condensed matter and solid state physics, it is true that it has been experimentally driven in the past. Experiments quantum experiemnt are inheritly difficult to control, with most data coming from them representing course-grained macroscopic information about the systems. Quantum computing has the chance to improve on this by introducing a tighter theory-experiment cycle.


Moreover, most of the systems we care about in condensd matter and solid state physics have well defined phases, where regions in parameter space that share the same phase have very charactteristic behaviors. This means that even noisy data (much like real experiemntal data) has a good shot at helping us determine phase transitions and confirm behavior that has been otherwise aloof in many experiments. High quality quantum data.

